Gronibard started in ‘98 as a joke-band with an ever-changing line-up of gays eventually counting up to nine members among which Albatard (bass), Anal Capone (vocals) and Necronembourg (guitars & vocals) would keep the trve kvlt gay spirit for more than ten years now. The unique demo, “Prendez-moi!” was recorded for a half before (yes, before) the band’s first rehearsal and for the other half, during that said first rehearsal (in fact, the “before” part is some sort of noise improvisation in a radio studio).

After some comp. tapes, some never-released EPs and other pleasures every underground band having a name starting to spread knows, they finaly end on a five way split CD with other local bands (in which they would eventualy play too), among which Running Guts, a noise-core band fronted by Nicolas Foubert, founder of Bones Brigade records, in ‘00.

Impressed by their new stuff, he offers them to release their debut album (something nobody would have believed to have any kind of success at that time!). The three gays then found who would later become known as a big name in the metal drumming community, Gilles Delecroix (Aborted) as well as a very decent recording studio that would give the future, untitled, debut album a sound every grindcore band is dreaming of during wet nights of gay dreaming for years.

Thus the full-length was released in ‘01 and the band, coming as a “Mars Attacks!” UFO in the scene, claiming everywhere “We come in peace”, stormed the whole underground scene and let no one heterosexual, somehow like the “Gay niggers from outter space” (good movie!). The release was followed by an incessant touring of France and Europe.

Two years later, the band recorded some sessions for upcoming split releases among which the “should-have-been-cult” split CD with Exit-13 Bill Yurkiewicz of Exit-13 / Relapse / Last House On The Left records asked them over and over. Unfortunately, Exit-13 last their material during some trouble circumstances and split up right after. So Gronibard released the said material, along with an acoustic session previously planned for some EP as the “Satanic tuning club” MCD and more gigs all over Europe (and a one-off at the Maryland Deathfest in the USA) followed.

But these three years of intense pressure and touring had exhausted the now five (with the addition of Sylvester Staline’s Cédric Méganck, aka “Ptite Bite” or “Mongolito”) gays were left with an Infernal rectum bleeding that took them three years to cure.

With such a cult album as their debut, Gronibard had quite no option to record a second full-length. Either they recorded an album in the very same vein and everyone would have said that the band was releasing the same stuff over and over, either they changed direction and everyone would have said they wimped out. Well, in fact, they did both so the whole planet can hate them for good reasons now!

So the writing process started back in ‘07 and the album, “We are french, fukk you” was released on October of the next year, for the band’s tenth anniversary. Still gore when it comes to vocals, the album shows a more grind’n'roll approach of their homosexuality, with longer songs and more complex structures… but still as stupid and still as well produced.

But, beware, “We are french, fukk you” is just a side of what Gronibard still has under its (bullet-) belt: more stuff has been recorded during that session, quite different in style, again… be prepared for more surprising style change in the very near future, you, gays!

Members of the band also play in a grindcore/death-metal side-project named Warscars.

Years Active: 1998 – present (24 years)

Members: Gilles Delecroix

Top Tags: Grindcore, Goregrind, Porngrind, French, Pornogrind

Top Albums: Gronibard, We Are French Fukk You, Satanic Tuning Club, Regarde Les Hommes Sucer, Fast Gays Of Humanity, De Mysterfriize Pomme Bananas

Popular Now: Va faire la vaisselle; Latest Release: Regarde Les Hommes Sucer (19 May 2022 - 16 tracks)

Similar Artists: Cliteater, Ultra Vomit, Gutalax, Rompeprop, Lock Up, Rectal Smegma

Last.fm: Scrobbles 439.6K; Listeners 12.8K