Батюшка (Batushka) is a Polish black metal band which formed in 2015 in Białystok. Their lyrics are written in Church Slavonic, the conservative Slavic liturgical language used by the Eastern Orthodox Church. Pronounced "batyushka," the band's name means "father" and is used to address an Orthodox priest. Their songs contain lines of liturgical chanting paired with black metal instrumentation.

In the spring of 2015, multi-instrumentalist Krzysztof Drabikowski, aka Derph, was listening to Orthodox music on YouTube. He came across a comment stating "God's hymns are more metal than any satanic black metal music out there." This inspired him to combine black metal with traditional Orthodox liturgical music. He originally invited his friend and former Heuresis bandmate Lech to record vocals, but he dropped out of the project due to difficulties with writing lyrics in Old Church Slavonic. Drabikowski then decided to take care of the texts himself. After recording bass, guitars, and drums, he recruited drummer Marcin Bielemiuk who became a full time member. In July, Drabikowski recruited Hermh vocalist Bartłomiej Krysiuk. They decided to only go by Cyrillic versions of their first names Христофоръ (Krzysztof Drabikowski), Варфоломей (Bartholomew Krysiuk), and Мартин (Marcin Bielemiuk).

Batushka released their debut single "Yekteníya VII" on November 20, 2015 as a clear 7" lathe cut vinyl, limited to 50 copies. This was followed by their full length album Литоургиiа (Litourgiya), released on December 4, 2015. Both were released through Krysiuk's own label Witching Hour Productions. The album was critically acclaimed with various websites naming it as one of the best metal albums of 2015, and it was a commercial hit in the Polish metal scene. Its overwhelming success prompted the band to start performing live due to invitations from European music festivals. Drabikowski arranged a live band featuring himself on lead guitar, Krysiuk on lead vocals, and Bielemiuk on drums alongside a bassist, rhythm guitarist, and three backing chanters. Following some regional touring, concerts in Russia and Belarus were also planned, but were canceled due to protests and alleged death threats. This incident also ended the public anonymity of the core lineup due to Drabikowski doing interviews about the situation.

In 2016, with Behemoth and Bölzer, the band embarked on a Polish tour called Rzeczpospolita Niewierna (The Republic of the Unfaithful). The following year, the band performed at Wacken Open Air and Brutal Assault. In October 2017, the band was signed to American label Metal Blade Records who re-released Litourgiya on November 3.

Marcin Bielemiuk left the band in April 2018. Four months later, Batushka played their first shows in the United States on their way to Psycho Las Vegas: two at the Knitting Factory in Brooklyn, New York and two at Reggie's in Chicago, Illinois.

In December 2018, both Drabikowski and Krysiuk claimed to have kicked the other member out, deciding to continue the band without him. The ownership of the band's name was legally disputed between the two artists, and Krysiuk took over the original band for touring and writing new music on its existing contract with Metal Blade. Thus, there are currently two active versions of Batushka. Drabikowski explained the situation in a video he uploaded on December 30, followed by an extensive and exclusive interview with Dark Art Conspiracy posted April 12, 2019.

Drabikowski's Batushka released a single titled "Песнь 1" on May 10, 2019. Five days later, Krysiuk's version released a single titled "Polunosznica." On May 26, Drabikowski released the new Batushka album Панихида under his own name via the Bandcamp page for his Sobolewo-based studio Sphieratz. Krysiuk's Batushka released the single "Wieczernia" on June 6. On July 12 they released the album Hospodi.

Krzysztof Drabikowski's Batushka has gone on to perform sold out headlining tours around Europe, including a special album show in Kiev on Novemebr 9, 2019, at which the album was performed in its entirety. Bartłomiej Krysiuk's Batushka hasn't fared as well with live performances; in October of 2019, he announced that their November through December North American tour was canceled. They had already just canceled their Australian tour that would've taken place the same week of this announcement. These cancelations followed rumors of low ticket sales.

Drabikowski's Batushka has an official homepage at http://www.xn--80aab1b0bxb3b.pl/ and Facebook at https://www.facebook.com/truebatushka. Krysiuk's Batushka has an official homepage at https://batushkaofficial.com/.

Top Tags: Black Metal, Polish, Doom Metal, Polish Black Metal, Poland

Top Albums: ПЕСНЬ 1, ЛитоургиIа, ПЕСНЬ 1 - Single, Свеча Господня, Молитвы, Панихида

Popular Now: Песнь 1; Latest Release: Z (19 March 2022 - 8 tracks)

Similar Artists: Batushka, Grima, Morokh, Путь, БѢСЪ, Mgła

Last.fm: Scrobbles 418K; Listeners 25.3K