Onset of Putrefaction is the debut album by German technical death metal band Necrophagist. It was recorded almost solely by the band's founder, guitarist and vocalist Muhammed Suiçmez. He recorded all the vocal tracks and programmed the drum tracks with the help of a computer. The bass and guitar tracks were mostly recorded by him, with a few being recorded by former Necrophagist members - Jochen Bittmann recorded a few bass tracks, and Björn Vollmer recorded a few parts of Extreme Unction's guitar solo.

The original version of the album was very difficult to obtain, due to distribution problems with the label that owned the rights. Willowtip Records founder Jason Tipton described the situation in an interview:
I first heard Onset in 2000 and I started e-mailing Muhammed, then asking about releasing it in the US and stuff. Muhammed always wanted it to happen, but things were a complete mess. He had signed a really bad contract and his label had gone out of business and the rights to that album were sold to another company. So this company owned the rights to the CD and they were near impossible for anyone to deal with, in fact they weren't doing their job at all. They didn't really care at all about the band, didn't have the CD in press. It was a complete mess.

The 2004 re-release of Onset of Putrefaction is a remixed, resampled and remastered edition, including vastly improved drum samples used by the drum machine (with the help of newly recruited drummer Hannes) compared with the 1999 release of the album. It features two bonus tracks from their 1995 demo tape, which were also remastered.

The band decided not to try to get the loudest disc possible for the remaster. Instead, they asked their mastering engineer to leave in some dynamic range and not to cause undue distortion in a quest for loudness. As a result, the record's sonic qualities are appreciably better then most metal records released today.

Top Tags: Technical Death Metal, Death Metal, Progressive Death Metal, 1999, Brutal Death Metal

Release Date: 2000 | 10 tracks

Last.fm: Scrobbles 2.3M; Listeners 81.7K