Bérurier noir is a French punk band formed in Paris in 1983 by Loran (guitar), François (vocals) and Dédé (drum machine). They called themselves "noir" (black) for the color of mourning (because their first concert was planned to be also their last) and for anarchy and "Bérurier" after the character from the novels of Frédéric Dard. Instead of being an end, the success of their first show inspired them to continue. A cult band, Bérurier Noir were loved by a generation of youth and feared by concert organisers for the riots that followed their shows.

On the one hand, Bérurier Noir's music was clearly derived from British punk rock as far as music and lyrics were concerned. Most of their songs were short, aggressive and usually based on a couple of basic power chords. Their lyrics reflected the typical concerns of punks such as the rejection of consumerism, politics and traditional social order and the anger felt by disaffected youth, tramps and outsiders in general. On the other, they added some interesting innovations. Their rhythm section consisted of a cheap drum machine, which became an essential and arguably endearing part of their sound. The frequent use of a saxophone as of the mid-eighties also set them apart from most other punk rock bands.

They would regularly appear on record sleeves and on stage wearing clown outfits, mock police uniforms or pig masks. Their shows were a unique and highly festive cross between a punk rock concert, a grotesque circus and an anarchist rally.

By 1985, the band had grown to include François Guillemot (vocals), Loran (guitar), Pascal kung fu (saxophone), Helno (backing vocals), Laul aka Bol (backing vocals), la grande Titi (backing vocals), la petite Titi (backing vocals).

By 1987: François Guillemot (vocals), Loran (guitar), Masto (saxophone), Helno (backing vocals), Laul aka Bol (backing vocals), la grande Titi (backing vocals), la petite Titi (backing vocals).

By 1989: François Guillemot (vocals), Loran (guitar), Masto (saxophone), la petite Titi (backing vocals), Jojo (fire breather and backing vocals).

The band refused to make a profit and also to work. As a result, they lived precariously. In 1989, after three farewell concerts at the Paris Olympia, they disbanded. François later formed Molodoï and "François Béru et les Anges Déchus", Loran formed Ze6, Tromatism and later A.D. (Division de la horde).

On December 4, 2003, they reunited for the release of a DVD documenting their career. The concert took place in the context of the Transmusicales in Rennes. They have since played other concerts, in Quebec and in Belgium.

http://beruriernoir.fr/

Years Active: 1983 – 2006 (23 years)

Founded In: Paris, Île-de-France, France

Members: François Guillemot, Helno, LauL, Loran, Masto (1985 – 1989)

Top Tags: Punk, Punk Rock, French, Francais, Rock

Top Albums: Concerto Pour Détraqués, Viva Bertaga, Joyeux Merdier, Macadam Massacre, Abracadaboum!, Concerto Pour Détraqués ! / Joyeux Merdier

Popular Now: Porcherie; Latest Release: La Bataille de Pali-Kao (18 November 2020 - 17 tracks)

Similar Artists: Ludwig Von 88, Les Sales Majestés, Les Sheriff, Parabellum, Tagada Jones, Les Wampas

Last.fm: Scrobbles 943.8K; Listeners 28.3K