10,000 days is the Grammy-Award winning fourth full-length studio album by Tool. By the end of 2006 the album had sold almost 3 million copies worldwide and in June 2006 the album was given a Platinum award by the RIAA.

Recorded: August to December 2005 at O'Henry Studios and Loft and Grandmaster Studios
Mixed at Bay 7 ( Read 'The Making of Tool's "10,000 Days"': http://bit.ly/oJ7vWi)
Mastered at Gateway Mastering Studios
Released on May 2, 2006
Label: Volcano II / Tool Dissectional
Booklet: Stereoscopic sunglasses for viewing images inside the booklet created by Alex Grey.
The album received Grammy nominations and the aforementioned packaging actually won an award.
The name of the album indicates 27 years, approximately 10,000 days, of singer Maynard James Keenan's mother's paralysis ending with her death.  
Personell: Maynard James Keenan - vocals; Adam Jones - gutar, sitar; Justin Chancellor - bass; Danny Carey - drums, tabla, percussion, Joe Barresi - engineering and mixing; Alex Grey - illustrations; Bob Ludwig - mastering; Lustmord - weather effects, Bill McConnell - vocals; Camella Grace - Voice of Nurse on "Lost Keys"

They say about 10,000 days in the Mix magazine: "10,000 days is a rich listening experience. There are multiple layers of music and sound. Listening to the album a couple of times and discovering new things is part of the experience.  It takes you to many places."

Rolling stone reviewer says: "But the music has such anthemic power that even the most cynical listener can find himself chanting along to lines like "To ascend, you must die!/You must be crucified!"

They say at Pitchfork media: "The lyrics-- the usual mix of drug references, conspiracy theories, tortured declarations of vague emotional trauma, and general doom-mongering-- won't do much to convince non-believers."

10,000 days is a spiritual journey made through lyrics and sounds. Powered by death and suffering experience, by distrust to "hypocrites and fat fingers pointers", and by drugs, of course. Marijuana and various mind-altering substances were probably involved here. As is clear from cooperation with Alex Grey, as well.

Top Tags: Progressive Metal, Progressive Rock, Metal, 2006, Tool

Release Date: 28 April 2006 | 11 tracks

Last.fm: Scrobbles 30.6M; Listeners 874.5K

Rating: Metascore: 68